Particularly those that further loosen
and centralize decision making about overseas investments
of the kind that have already proven to be economically,
socially, and environmentally disastrous
for New Zealand economically.
Sound decisions about overseas investments in New Zealand
require robust, rigorous, and impartial risk assessment.
In the case of industrial forestry, for example,
on which I focused in my written submission,
this requires an in-depth knowledge of local ge,
the dynamics of local waterways, marine environments,
and local communities.
It's just not possible for ministers
or the overseas investment office
or indeed central government to have this kind
of localized expertise.
Unfortunately, industrial forestry
demonstrates a long history of ill-informed decisions
by central government
with devastating impacts on local environments, um,
regional economies and local communities.
So I'll speak about ity,
which is the region which I know best with some
of the most erodable landscapes in the world.
And these policies from central government over time have
included initially the clear failing
and burning of native forests, followed by attempts
to control the resulting absolutely devastating erosion
with plantations of shallow rooting, relatively short-lived
and highly flammable.
Exotic monocultures then privatizing these plantations in
the eighties, selling them off eventually
to overseas companies,
and allowing them to be clear, felt followed by trying
to control the resulting devastating impacts
after cyclone Ebola, for example,
by repeating the same cycle with foresters incentivized
to plant plantations of, uh, conifers across steep,
highly erodible landscapes right down to the banks
of streams and rivers,
and then allowing them to be felt again and replanted.
These impacts on the region have include radical erosion,
some of the worst in the world,
and losses of top soil rivers across the re region
that are even more sediment laden than the
Yang Sea in China.
Harbors and offshore fisheries filled with sediment
destroying shell fisheries, as well as fisheries.
Denuded hillsides stripped back
to bedrock in many catchments.
Now up the headwaters
and rising river beds
that exponentially are increasing the risk
of catastrophic flooding to coastal communities,
including Gisborne city, which is built on a floodplain
and widespread destruction of roads, bridges, fences,
paddocks, orchards, farm buildings, family homes,
public facilities, the loss of life, the disruption
of communications and water supplies
and devastating impacts on every other region.
Every other industry in the region costing billions
of dollars from Ill thought through
overseas investments in forestry.
Most recently, there's the ETS incentive
to leave untended pine plantations as carbon sinks full
of weeds and pests as an extreme fire risk
for all other landowners that yields little
or no employment only profit, uh, profits
for overseas investors since about the 1920,
central governments have repeated the same mistakes over
and over again, or invented new ones like the ETS,
the proposed amendments to the OIA, um, relating
to forestry follow exactly the same pattern, ensuring
that the cycle of stupidity will keep on happening
until there's nothing left to wreck the harm caused
by some international forestry companies.
I've outlined this in my written submission
and the exorbitant ongoing costs they've inflicted on
taxpayers and local communities
with poor forestry practices.
Some of the worst in the world are documented in judgments
by courts, by the auditors
of the Forestry Stewardship Council in Bon,
who have just absolutely slammed what's going on in forestry
in tti, and in the graphic report of an ministerial inquiry
after cyclone Gabrielle, after these experiences
and the recent floods in Tasman, I find it absolutely
inexcusable, unforgivable that this government is proposing
to loosen rather than tighten controls on overseas forestry
investments in New Zealand.
And I would implore you rather than removing
or making, um, not making mandatory the benefit
to New Zealand test, this must remain mandatory
for overseas investments in forestry,
and it shouldn't include, it should be strengthened
to include a, a benefit to region test
that takes local geologies
and economic impacts into account in relation
to specific investments as they're proposed informed
by advice, advice from the region.
The investor test must remain mandatory
and it should be strengthened
to include a rigorous examination of the previous record
of an international forestry companies
before they're allowed to operate in our country.
And these tests ought to be carried out
with very strong safeguards to avoid the possibility
of ministerial capture by lobbyists
and forestry in interests,
and to ensure the credibility of the claimed benefits
to New Zealand and the region.
And I was just recently in bond talking to the head, um, of,
um, of ethics for the whole world
at the Forestry Stewardship Council.
And I can tell you that from
that international vantage point,
what is going on in forestry practices in our region in TDI
are just absolutely deplored, um,
globally as well as locally.
So please do not loosen these controls.
Please strengthen them.
Please make sure that when you make overseas investments on
behalf of our country, you make them with some rigorous
application of good knowledge
and understanding of local conditions. Thank you very much.
Okay. Oh, thank you. We are at time,
but, uh, we, we appreciate that you've joined us Dam.
So I am, um, certainly, um, willing
to give someone a question or, or someone to make, uh,
or seek any clarity.
Not that clarity is probably required
after, um, your presentation, um, Damien,
but let's just see if we've got any hands up.
And no, I think you've made yourself, um, uh,
explicitly clear, um,
both in your written submission and your oral.
So thank you for, for, um, uh, your patience this afternoon.
And thanks for appearing before our committee.
Well, I'm speaking for,
I'm on the transitional advisory group in Gisborne,
and I'm speaking for everybody in our region pretty much,
except for a very few foresters.
Okay. No, we, we hear, we hear you there.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for that.
Bye. Okay, thank you. Okay.
Now that takes us, uh, members to Dr. Jeff, uh, Bertram.
I can see him. I can see him there.
And we'll, he's gonna come through
and he's gonna give us five minutes as well.
So welcome.
Can I just check that you can hear me?
Yes, yes. We can hear you loud and clear.
Okay. Thanks very much. Um, yeah.
When I was a young economist at the University
of Oxford back in the seventies,
I spent 10 years working on the economic history of Peru.
Um, and one of the central topics that we addressed in
that study was the role
of foreign direct investment in the Peruvian economy over
a hundred years from the 1890s to the 19, the late 1970s.
Um, and, uh, I learned two things from, from that period of,
of study and research.
One of them is that, uh,
economics does give you very powerful tools
for evaluating foreign direct investments.
Um, but economics is not the only discipline that you need
to turn to, to get a, a full picture of costs and benefits.
And so a comprehensive cost benefit assessment of the impact
of a foreign direct investment is quite a,
quite a solid job, and it needs to go beyond the boundaries
of what mainstream economics, uh, can contribute,
although that's very important.
The second thing that I learned is that, uh,
you can't prejudge the implications of a foreign investment
until you've had a look at it.
Um, foreign investments do span a very wide range
from some that are constructive and, and,
and produce benefits for the host economy to others
that are simply damaging predatory and corrupting.
And, uh, in the Peruvian case, we encountered more
of the second than of the first, I have to say.
Um, but you have to embark on the study
of any particular project, I think with a willingness
to look seriously
and rigorously at all the issues that it, that it raises.
And so I'd refer you guys to
the Nobel Prize in economics this year, which went to, um,
Aaron slu
and, uh, some colleagues of his, uh, for, for their book,
which is called Why Nations Fail.
Um, and the essential point that they make in that book is
that the institutional setup, uh, is absolutely vital to,
in determining whether a nation is prone
to rent seeking corruption, predation, exclusionary,
uh, conduct, um,
or inclusive, uh, constructive,
participatory and all the rest of it.
And obviously you can guess which way they,
they judge the thing.
Um, now my point in relation to this bill is that, uh,
it seems to me to be pointing New Zealand very firmly, um,
against all the lessons of my nation's fail, um,
towards, uh, an uncritical
and predetermined approach
to evaluating foreign direct investment projects.
Um, basically a blocking off of the opportunity
to truly explore the detriments as well as the benefits
of any particular project.
Um, a strong degree of predetermination, uh, in the sense
that all projects are expected to be good, when
in fact history tells us that plenty are bad and,
and should not proceed.
Um, and, uh, it, it worries me very, very greatly that, uh,
rather than moving towards more rigorous assessment
and more thorough appro, um, investigation of costs
and benefits, this bill is contributing to moving away from
that in the direction that the, uh, that the existing
overseas investment Act already does.
And in my written submission, I've outlined, um, one
or two of the things in the existing act, uh,
that I think predetermine, um, the outcomes
of the overseas investment investigations in a direction
that opens the way for us
to recruit the worst rather than the best
of overseas investors.
Um, there's a, the saying in economics,
bad money drives out good.
Um, leaving the playing field wide open
does provide an op an invitation to the more
predatory and extractive side
of the international investment community,
and can be discouraging, in fact,
to the constructive and useful side.
So I really do think that the whole question of
what is in the national interest and how it is looked
after by the evaluation process, um,
remains pretty unclear in this bill.
But, uh, as I read it between the lines,
the whole thrust is towards an uncritical predetermined
approval process, uh, which is actually open to lobbying
and corruption at, at several stages along the way,
and which ultimately comes to rest very much on the, uh,
individual determinations made by the regulator
and the minister, um, without any obvious need for them
to expose very clearly
to the public the basis in which they've
reached those conclusions.
So I do urge you to recommend that this bill not proceed.
Um, happy to take any questions.
Okay. Thank you very much. Uh, Dr.
Bertram, um, happy for questions.
We've got Dr. Deborah Russell.
Oh, Deborah, you're just on mute.
It's probably quite lucky.
I was on mute for a moment there.
I said, thank you. Um, thank you for your, um, submission.
Um, it's really, really interesting.
Um, I'm, I'm just, I suppose I wanna just draw attention to,
I mean, if I'm reading it at a very broad level, it,
it's talking about how that the test we've got on this bill
don't take into a account water broader sort of wellbeing,
um, issues and broader, um, externalities to a,
an investment decision.
Um, so I'm, I'm just sort of stacking it up now with the,
the public finance amendment bill,
where we are removing the wellbeing tests.
Do you have any comments on that?
Uh, well, to be perfectly honest,
I find the wellbeing test, uh, at the moment not
to be really tightly enough specified
to give a fully operational frame
of reference for making policy.
Um, I, I, I've been a little disappointed in the attempts
to, um, to actually frame a wellbeing, um,
analytical process that, that, that can actually
weed things out or, or, or guide decision making.
Um, there's an awful lot of, of nice words, um, and,
and things that feel good,
but I, I guess I'm committed to a much, um,
a much more brutal, I suppose,
and cold frame of reference for making, making decisions.
But I do think that, you know, there are really serious
externalities covered by that wellbeing framework.
Um, and they are to do with the sort of pressures
that foreign investments, particularly in areas like mining,
um, can put onto, uh, an economy
where natural resources are not unlimited
and where environmental concerns are really important.
Um, but just a, but just another example of an externality.
It's one that's been worrying me quite a lot.
Um, you'll be familiar with the fact that Kalka, now,
Rio Tinto runs a smelter down south.
And, um, over, over the last 30 years, I've sort
of been keeping an eye on that
because it's exactly one of the sort of projects
where the economics is quite interesting to follow.
Um, and one of the big spread effects from the Rio Tinto
smelter, uh, which you would've observed over the last 10
years, is that it's a major factor in determining the price
that electricity comes to ordinary households at keeping,
uh, that smelter by merely existing, keeps hunt going, uh,
and keeps electricity prices high.
And you would've seen that when the smelter looked like
closing down a few years ago.
Um, all the, uh,
gen Taylor's share prices dropped immediately
for the very good reason that, uh,
the smelter is fundamental to the profitability
of a completely different industry, uh,
and the wellbeing of a wide range
of electricity consumers across the country.
Uh, I don't now, now for me, that's
what the National Interest test, uh, needs
to be thinking about things as wide as that.
Uh, that seems to me
that the framework within which this bill sets is much more
likely to, to narrow things right down away from that.
Uh, but if, if, for example, you're looking forward
to having data centers coming here, if you've been watching
what the, uh, what Google, Amazon Meta
and the others have been doing in the construction of,
of data centers for,
for developing their AI large language models over in the
States, they are now putting enormous pressure on the
electricity system in the United States.
Um, and I anticipate that if under this bill we fast track
a a couple of seriously large, um, internet data centers,
uh, you'll, you'll have another, another 10 years of
ordinary electricity consumers carrying high prices while
large international corporates, uh, sign up deals
for cut price power on the Rio Tinto model.
And that worries me because it's very difficult in advance
to get a grasp of the consequences of the sort of these sort
of deals, which will be done under commercial
confidentiality until they're announced,
and then they'll be, they'll burst upon you.
Um, this is just a little, little red flag warning for you.
Thank you. That's most instructive.
Okay. Thank you. Okay, thanks dear brother.
Uh, thank you, uh, Dr. Bertram.
We've, we've had, uh, good 10 minutes there,
so we appreciate you taking the time. Apologies for
That. No, no, no,
no, no.
We wanted to, uh, make sure as you as an expert, um,
specialist, we wanted to make sure that you had plenty
of time, as did members.
Um, so thank you for, uh, beaming into us, um,
this afternoon, and for your submission written and oral.
I Okay. Uh, Clark, how are we going?
Who, who, who have we got next?
Have we got Jody got members,
We've got Jody Alice, and then Colin Robertson,
and that will be the last submitters for the day.
Okay. So by about one 30 members, we will go into private
and then we will, um, uh, we should be done
by one 40, I would've thought at the latest.
Okay. Okay. So we're welcoming. Um, Jody Ellis,
she coming through, Jordan
Just sent her a prompt to join the panel,
but, um, she hasn't responded to that yet.
Um, would you like to,
should we try Colin first and come back to
Jody? Yeah, let's try Colin, because,
um, Jody was scheduled
for one 50, so it's a bit rough on her,
but let's try, um, let's try Colin Robertson,
if he's available.
Colin is joining now. Oh, great. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, hey, Mr. Robertson. Welcome.
Um, we've got, we've got five minutes allocated for you.
Please leave some time for
a question. We look forward to it.
Lovely. Ken, I'm having a few
technology pro, give me a second.
Can you hear me?
Yes. We can see and hear, hear you loud and clear.
Wonderful. Um, sorry,
I thought I was gonna have another five minutes.
So thanks for the opportunity, uh, to speak with you today.
Um, so first, um, the overseas investment, um,
national Interest Test Amendment bill, it's, uh,
avoided significant scrutiny, uh,
and I believe progress on it should be halted
until sufficient consultation has occurred.
Um, treasury's regulatory impact statement, uh, commented
that consultation on the detailed design proposals was not
undertaken with key stakeholders on, uh, how the issues, uh,
with the BET act might be addressed.
Uh, treasury noted explicitly that, uh,
there was notable limitations on the bills, uh,
quality assurance processes.
Uh, the, uh, explicit commentary, um, said that, uh, users
and key stakeholders, uh, weren't cons considered consulted
because of time constraints,
and it points to, uh,
a democratic deficit in the Bill's development, uh, along
with one day for oral submissions and five minutes a piece.
It's quite frankly, uh, inadequate.
So I imagine the quantity of submissions was quite low, uh,
given that there was only one article in the media
by Jane Kelsey, who you just heard from
University of Auckland.
Um, and, uh,
the only piece in the national press was from Radio
New Zealand and other media entities have
been curiously quiet.
Um, the protective pro, uh,
protection provisions in the bill, uh, are toothless, uh,
and they're disingenuous attempt
to be toughen foreign investment while simultaneously
rolling out the red carpet for it.
It's billed as a pragmatic
and, uh, streamlined approach when as in reality, it's, uh,
a muddled capitulation to foreign capital.
Um, it's, uh, obviously, uh,
prioritizes interests
of foreign capital over then the wellbeing,
um, of the nation.
Um, so when compared to the robust
and comprehensive requirements of other developed nations,
uh, the bills, uh, flimsy, it's a Shelby,
we Right approach that'll lead
to a one-time sailor extraction of strategic assets.
And the bill proposes
that the co essentially selling country, uh,
for a few crumbs from the table crawl cloth, um, the,
the bill also, uh, the so-called national interest test.
It's, uh, a term so ill defined its practically meaningless,
um, that the, the starting point was a presumption
of an approval, uh, unless risks identified.
This, uh, reverses the previous more prudent approach
and signals to foreign investment than New Zealand's open
for business, no questions asked.
Um, the Swift 15 day triage period
for less sensitive investments is quite frankly a joke.
Uh, it's a bureaucratic formality, uh, designed
to rubber stamp applications without any genuine scrutiny.
Um, the, the ministerial direction provisions, um, uh,
with significant discretion
to interpret national interest considerations, uh,
raises questions about the need
to protect against the perverse consequences
of concentrating powers.
Uh, the proposals in the builder start contrast
to the serious multifaceted screening processes employed
by countries such as Australia, Canada, the us, and the uk.
Um, the United States, uh, sorry, Australia, uh,
foreign Investment Review Board, F-R-I-R-B, for example,
operates with a far more comprehensive, uh, appraisal.
Their systems designed to be a gatekeeper,
uh, not a greeter.
Um, the United States,
whether it's committee on foreign investment in the
United States, it's even more
formidable and serious approach.
Um, it's got broad mandate to review any foreign investment
that could affect us any way.
So their systems are fortress, whereas, uh, the post plan
for New Zealand is a revolving door.
So, uh, the New Zealand bill, uh, by comparison, uh,
adopts a narrow, economically driven lens.
Its sidelines crucial considerations like environmental
protection, public access to land, community wellbeing.
By removing a multifaceted testing framework in favor
of a single national,
national interest test effectively allows these vital
concerns to be ignored
or dismissed, uh,
as inconvenient obstacles to economic growth.
The, uh, result is a system
that fetishizes timely consent over due diligence, um,
a shortsighted policy
that will have irreversible consequences.
The Swift 15 day, um, review process, along
with its automatic approval mechanism, if delayed
beyond 15 days, is a dereliction of duty.
It creates a vacuum where critical national security risks,
such as acquisition of strategically important businesses,
intellectual property
or control over critical infrastructure,
can easily be overlooked.
This approach is an embarrassing display of naivety at best,
or evidence of something much more sinister in a era
of complex geopolitical competition.
The uk, for example, under its National Security
and Investment Act 2021,
takes a proactive mandatory approach to sensitive sectors.
It requires notification
for investments in 17 critical areas.
New Zealand's bill, and it's rushed
to reduce compliance costs,
demonstrative fundamental failure
to grasp this modern reality.
In conclusion, this bill is a bill that, uh,
promises protection, but delivers a flimsy facade.
Its pathetic attempt to reconcile that I
irreconcilable the new bill shifts the primary focus on the
national interest test, identifying managing risks rather
than seeking to de demonstrable benefits.
It, um, stated aim to enable the consent
of less sensitive investments means the default position is
now that the investment can happen
unless a risk is identified.
The evidence for positive economic impacts from FDI in
developed countries is also mixed.
The proposed system, not only weaker than its counterparts
and other developed nations's also actively designed to be
so, so the betrayal of national interest, it purports
to protect, um, will be New Zealanders a paid price.
And they due are due to recommend
that bill does not proceed.
The rush red legislative process, devoid of, uh, public
and expert consultation, uh,
carries a subsequent substantial risk of overlooking
critical perspectives, potential unintended consequences,
and diverse impact of affected communities
or environmental systems.
The approach undermines the principles
of democratic process, compromises the robustness
of the policy, and diminishes the, uh, legitimacy of its,
um, eventual outcomes.
There's much more, uh, but I am limited to five minutes.
Um, so that is all.
Okay. No, that's good.
We are at time, but I'll give members an opportunity if
they've got anything to ask or say.
I can't, I can't see that, Mr. Robertson.
So, um, thank you, uh, for appearing before the committee
and thanks for your oral
and written submission this afternoon.
Lovely, thank you.
Thank you. Okay, members, that takes us to,
are we on our last, um, submitter for the day?
Um, Jayden,
have we got Jody Alice lined up yet?
Yes, she's sitting in the virtual audience.
I've just sent her a prompt. I think she's coming in now.
Oh, brilliant. Thank you.
Okay, Jody.
Oh, very good. We can see you,
uh, Ms.
Jody Ellis. Looks like you're trying to, you are racing
to find a quieter room,
so, we'll, we will let you do that.
Hey, everyone jumping this submission in
between my, oh, my day.
Oh, we, whereabouts are we, are we in, uh,
tell us where you are first.
It's intriguing.
Can't hear a thing. How are you? Um, I didn't,
Okay. Can you hear us? Can
you hear
Me? Can
you hear me? Yeah, I, we might just, we might just,
um, if there's any, uh, colleagues, um,
that are talking next door, we might just ask you
to see if you can, um, quiet, uh, quiet them down
for five minutes because, um, it just interrupts
with your, uh, speaking.
We, we wanna hear you unvarnished.
It's okay. I've just, so yeah.
All my attention now, I've just
No, thank you. Thank you for
seeing us 20 minutes
earlier than your scheduled.
Uh, tell us, uh, introduce yourself
and we'd like to know where, where you are beaming in from
today, and we look forward to your five minutes.
Um,
I'm originally from cuny, but I'm living in,
and, um, most of my concern, um, about this bill,
um, as you would've noticed in my, um, submission was to do
with the, um, the, the, um,
foreign investment by SA Gold, um,
and the impact that could have on our environment into to,
and, um, most notably
on the waterways
of the Taca River in the whitewater, Kiki Springs.
Um, I, I found it interesting to read,
um, in the, um, in the Nelson Mail that,
um, so gold have not actually achieved, um, many of the, um,
criteria that they're supposed to have achieved for, um,
continuing this, this mining project they had.
And, um, I just think, um,
with all the events we've had on the top
of the staff lately, um, you know, anywhere
that's a hill has basically had landslides down.
I drove up the hill last weekend,
and it's just astonishing the impact of the floods.
Um, you know, we are all localized in our little, um,
communities, and not
until you see the aerial footage on the news
that you actually, you see the impact of the body, um,
you know, from Tupperware right down
through the Mortal Valley.
And, um, just really opposed to
foreign investment such as Sarge
in our area because of the negative environmental impacts,
but also the economic impacts of, of tourism also.
Um, and as far as, um,
the bill that, um, is concerned with, um,
giving, giving, um,
or taking away, um, banks' ability
to actually do positive things to mitigate climate change,
I just think, you know, what kind of future is that for, um,
for, I can see you're looking a bit bored, Mr. Brewer,
but, um, it's, you know, I'm working in a high school here
and every day I see the, um,
and it just really concerns me that, that the Act Party
can come in and New Zealand first,
or this coalition government basically,
and just bring in things
that really do seem nefarious to me
and are not good for the future of our planet.
And our,
that's, that's all I've got to say really.
I, I, I just, actually, I'll just say one more thing.
I think that the fact that this issue has only got two
and a half hours of committee time,
it's just another travesty of justice on our,
um, democratic,
Well, it's got, it's had a bit longer than that.
We, we kicked off at nine o'clock this morning.
But you, you make your point. You make your point. Yeah.
Um, no, that's, no, thank you.
Um, uh, members, have we got any, um, questions for,
for Jody or comments?
A, if I may, um, just to say thank you
for interrupting your school day,
'cause I, I know how busy high schools get,
so I appreciate you doing that.
Yeah, I was actually just moving my laptop over over
and I just happened to see that I've been promoted
to panelists and I thought, oh, shoot, a bit of just, um,
move into the adjacent room instead of, um, whipping over
to the special needs department.
So, um, yeah. Thanks.
Sorry it wasn't, um, the planned call at all,
but, um, yeah, basically
No. Well, thank you for
seeing us 20 minutes ahead of time.
And did you say you're at Macho Acre?
Uh, yes, that's correct.
And what's the, what's the school?
Um, moka High School.
Maka High School. Okay.
Well that's, that's, um, that's great work. Jody.
Thank you for beaming in. Thank you for your honesty.
And your, um, frankness, we, we hear you loud and clear.
Uh, uh, I, I wasn't bored.
I think that just must be my resting face. Sorry about that.
You're probably looking at something very
Well. Yeah, I've got windows
around me
and so some pe sometimes school kids and that walk past
or they're outside vaping
and I'm looking at the wrong things.
But I was listening to you. Thank you.
Okay, Thank you.
Okay, members, uh, we are gonna go, aren't we, Mr. Clark,
to the private session.
I invite you to go back to your, uh, invite
and uh, click onto the private link.
We'll see you in a couple of minutes. I.